+++
categories = []
date = 2024-01-22
description = "In the spirit of making the time to do the things I want to do and small attainable goals, this is the first of at least 4 weekly retrospectives I plan to write for the month of February."
images = ["/uploads/ogimgblogweekly1-1.png"]
slug = "a-brief-reintroduction"
tags = []
title = "A (brief) (re-)introduction"
draft = true

+++

Goal: let people know why/how we're different and why that may be better. Have them feel my passion and understand my vision and want to support it.

Hi, I'm Jen 👋 You may know me from Twitter, my journey of building in public, or you were one of the thousands of new users who discovered Lunch Money in the last few months.

This is a brief re-introduction because it's important that you understand my story and why Lunch Money is different than any other company or app that you've encountered.

Also because it's been (checks the time) almost exactly 2 years since my blog post and being 4 years into this solopreneur journey and in this current economy, I have a lot I share about bootstrapped solopreneurship and how I've felt protected as a software engineer by trade while my ex-colleagues and friends are getting laid off left and right.

One of my favorite things about solopreneurship is the ability to be authentic and human in all the best and worst ways, and to be received as you are.

How in the world is it possible that throughout a pandemic, a period of high inflation, massive sweeping layoffs across the tech industry, an extremely traumatic episode in my real life that took me out of a productive state for nearly 2 years that my solo-founded company in a highly-saturated market is not only still alive, but experiencing positive growth every month since 2019?

I will tell you everything.

//

In the last 4 years of being publicly solo in this company, I would receive occasionally the question of, what if something happened to me? Being seen as a single point of failure, the idea is that if I fell sick or got hit by a bus, what would happen? The nice thing is I have a concrete answer because it actually happened.

//

As robots and AI continue to make its place known in all industries, it's becoming increasingly important to not forget the human element in our daily interactions. The human element has been long lost in the corporate realm, yet consumers and workers continue to pile into these stores, being given rose-colored glasses and feeling like part of a family, only to be one of the first ones let go when a downturn arrives.

//

What makes us different from other companies that you might see in the market, whether in or industry or not? We are fully bootstrapped, therefore we are independent. We have reached a point of sustainability, for full transparency because we haven't had to expand the team. We have enough in the bank to hire 1 really really amazing engineer for 1 year. Not exactly the smartest business decision to make that jump. Raising money is also out of the question. We are already sustainable. If we raised money, we would be in the negative, with a large debt to repay to investors who expect a high return on their investment. Raising money would set us back to step zero and require us to have loftier goals and sets us on a different trajectory.

And you can tell who are the ones who have raised money. Well, not because all that information is public, but you can feel their ad dollar spend. You can feel where they cut corners because they are thinking about serving the thousands of clients they have, not the individual.

Let's run through the scenario of what we've seen happen with so many companies in the last few months. We've seen that no corporation is large enough to be safe from massive downfalls and executives are not afraid to cut the cord and let go of thousands just to make their numbers of next quarter. Because a sure-fire way to cut costs is to cut the thousands of people you employ, and then a few quarters later, profits are soaring and why wouldn't you expand the team? So then we see a massive hiring spree, and we're stuck in this vicious cycle where no one thinks about the individual and the customers are only fueling this.

//

Living in a world where a company can launch by paying millions of ad space in our Instagram feeds. Meanwhile, our marketing spend has been $0 and our marketing team is non-existent.

Think of us as the mom-and-pop shop down the street from the big box retailers.

Would you rather be the mom-and-pop shop owner who greets everyone and knows all the regulars and makes the decisions of the interior design and display, etc), or do you want to be the CEO of a big box store that serves millions of people daily and tackles huge problems at scale from the headquarters?

It's the difference between running a lifestyle business and getting a company to unicorn status
the Journey where the end goal is a company worth $2 to 4M as a solo founder versus $1B with a team of people is so different and really comes down to what appeals to you about being an entrepreneur

//

I'm here to tell you venture-backed is not the only way. That you can do it on your own, you just need to leverage a good community.

//

We lowered our pricing.

//

We have a strong community on Discord

//

We are working on a long-term sustainbility plan, because while it may seem like we're "behind" because we're not as big, we are doing relatively very well given our company size and trajectory. Sure, we can dump millions of dollars in to go through the Silicon Valley playbook of hyper-growth, but we will inevitably lose our human element and when push comes to shove, our employees whom we would have made to feel like family will be first to get axed and our beloved clients will see service decline.

//

Hiring on an as-needed, short-term basis

//

Everything needs to be perfect, every thing is seen as a press release and heavily filtered through a public relations team.

For instance, I can run this company solo and bootstrapped, go through a massive episode in my personal life and essentially disappear for (checks last blog post) almost exactly 2 years, and I get to pick up right where I left off.

A few things changed:

- pricing plan changed
- move to Discord
- long-term sustainability plan

thanks to

- where I had already taken Lunch Money
- my support team
- my loyal users

- Solopreneurship is more relevant than ever today

  - Hiring, model for sustainability
    More passionate about solopreneurship now that I've seen what it can do for me

    - Bootstrapped vs venture-backed. Lower stakes, we're already at our goal
    - Ability to lower prices
    - $0 spend on marketing, slow & steady growth
    - Loyaltees

The growth numbers themselves are not impressive. And why should they be? I don't watch my metrics and try to move the needle on everything. I focus on what I'm good at, continue to be a kind person, build in public, and everything else fell into place.
