+++
categories = []
date = ""
draft = true
slug = ""
tags = []
title = "Life in Fukuoka: On Culture Shock"

+++
Preface: This post is ripe with generalizations based on my observations as a foreigner in Japan who spent her last 25+ years in Canada and the US. Please note that when I say “the Japanese”, surely I know not everyone here abides by these principles. And certainly this is not an article about how awesome everything is in Japan, just some real things we have noticed and struggle with and laugh off in our day-to-day. Please enjoy!

We’re into the second month now and officially halfway through our stint in Japan. It’s been interesting to look back and reflect on how our perception of Fukuoka and Japan in general has changed since first arriving starry-eyed. Unsurprisingly, living and attempting to integrate into Japanese society is far different from visiting for a short number of days or weeks. For someone like me who finds immense joy in noticing and analyzing all the details, it’s been a real hoot.

Dare I say we’ve officially surpassed tourist status? Restaurant owners and coffee shop keepers are starting to recognize us. Our neighbourhood sake bar recounted seeing us walking around the area a few times. We’re getting better at navigating the local bus lines of this canal city wherein we’re starting to feel the comforts and familiarity of Home. 

While scaling Fukuoka as a city has been relatively straightforward, the cultural landscape has been more difficult to penetrate. We’re really starting to notice the extreme differences and lack of overlap between Japan and Canada & US. For starters, as I’m sitting here typing this at a Starbucks, the lady next to me has left her phone charging and her purse unattended for about 15 minutes now. 

By far the biggest difference and shock is the ubiquity of common courtesy in Japanese society. The hyper-awareness of when one might be inconveniencing someone else is instilled deeply. I feel this extends into all facets of life here, such as why everything in public from shops to the streets is always kept so tidy and clean. On top of that, the Japanese concept of hospitality, _Omotenashi_, in which one attempts to anticipate someone else’s needs before it’s shown or even realized by the person themselves, embellishes an already dutiful society.

This can be felt in every day life. The bus driver waits for each new passenger to sit down before starting the bus up again. A restaurant worker will walk you out into the streets to bow goodbye. A fellow patron might notice that you’re trying to find a seat for two and will willingly move or even leave the shop so you can sit together. Then, it gets more intense. We’ve noticed that hosts at a very fancy restaurant will literally stay in the bowing position on the streets while covertly stealing glances to see if their patrons have left their field of vision (In Japanese culture, there is a hierarchy when it comes to who should give the last bow). Multiple people have apologized to us for their poor level of English. (How I would respond if my Japanese was half decent: '_Um hello? We are in Japan and our Japanese is poor. We are sorry! We’re in your country! And if you’re speaking English at all, we probably think it’s amazing!'_) If you go to a large department store, you might catch a worker awkwardly running without trying to seem like they’re running because their arms are clinging by their side. Chances are they are getting something for someone and they don’t want to keep them waiting too long since department stores in Japan are huge, but they also don’t want to alarm anyone by running through a store frantically.

It seems that while the Japanese are overly aware of inconveniencing others, sometimes they are more than happy to inconvenience themselves so as to have you go on with your day sans distress or difficulty. But more often than not, especially to us foreigners, this results in an elevated level of awkwardness because we are unaware of how to navigate such a social situation. If you’ve ever seen the episode of Rick & Morty with the Meeseeks box, this is exactly how we feel about Japanese service people sometimes. (For those unaware of the episode, Meeseeks1 are creatures who are created to serve a singular purpose for which they will go to any length to fulfill \[..\] If a Meeseeks is not given a purpose at the beginning of its existence it seems to default to taking the purpose of the Meeseeks before it – [credit](https://rickandmorty.fandom.com/wiki/Mr._Meeseeks "credit"))  Once, as we were leaving the Startup Cafe where we work out of, I casually asked one of the volunteers if they knew where else might be open to laptop workers during the day. He couldn’t think of a place and proceeded to summon 2 of his fellow volunteers. Together, they racked their brains for an uncomfortable number of minutes as Justin and I were awkwardly trying to convey that it’s not a big deal because we were aware there aren’t many places but figured it wouldn't hurt to ask anyway. It took a while to abort the situation and we got some very unnecessarily deep apologetic bows on our way out.

We’ve adapted in some weird ways to this. Because our Japanese is still not very good, we often find ourselves between wanting to ask for something but not wanting to accidentally activate the relentless pursuit of a Japanese service-person. In other words, we might avoid asking a staff member for help because the amount of effort they will pour into finding the solution for us might not be worth the period of awkward broken communication.  Sometimes we get anxious if we’re leaving a place and the shopkeeper who had been serving us is no where to be seen; we don’t want them to feel bad for missing the opportunity to say good bye! Sometimes after we leave a shop and we hear someone running, we get worried thinking we might have forgotten something. It’s very common to see shopkeepers and waiters chasing after a patron who left something at their shop– embarrassingly, it happened to us twice!

The flip side to this kindness and common courtesy is that they can’t bear to delivery any sort of bad news. Oftentimes, we will walk into a restaurant that happens to be full or not accepting new patrons. Instead of simply telling us the facts, they will instead say a lot of “sorry’s” while bowing their head apologetically and slowly pushing us out the front door. They also have special vocabulary that exonerates them from giving any further information or excuse so as to “soften the blow”. The common one is “chotto” which can literally mean a million things depending on how you say it. [This article](https://rickandmorty.fandom.com/wiki/Mr._Meeseeks "https://rickandmorty.fandom.com/wiki/Mr._Meeseeks") explains it well if you want to get into it since I still haven’t been able to wrap my head around it, but the gist of it is depending on the context, it can mean anything from “a little” to “a lot”, from “wait a moment” to “can’t do it”. It’s basically a cop out to say, hey I don’t really want to get into it and you won’t want to either so I’ll just say chotto, and the other person will understand and both people will move on. Conceptually, it’s a word that I would like to use to other people but would be very annoyed if someone used it on me.

There’s a lot that we still can’t wrap our heads around. To us, there seem to be a lot of contradictions, or maybe they are just unaware, or we are hyper-aware. For instance, in Japan, the notion of _mottainai_ is very strong. In short, it represents an ideal of not wasting anything and not taking more than you need of anything. Sounds great and eco-friendly and ready for the 21st century, yet Japanese consumption of single-use plastic is abominable. Not just shopkeepers’ mindless excessive bagging of anything you buy, but as it is standard here to provide hot towels before a meal, a lot of restaurants will have disposable wet towels wrapped in plastic.

There is a strong notion of not disturbing others or causing discomfort to others. Anyone who’s been to Japan will notice how quiet the subways are, even during rush hour. You could hear a pimple pop on a bus full of people. They just don’t talk. However, when allergy season comes around, for some reason, is when this rule has its one exception. I now have confirmation that Asian men are the loudest sneezers in the world. I thought it was just my dad for the longest time. There is no effort to conceal the sneeze. It is as if all the noise they have pent-up is permitted to come out all at once and it is excusable, because well, the entire country of Japan goes through allergy season together at the same time.

The Japanese are also relatively conservative people. They don’t dress in revealing clothes compared to the west and they can be profoundly shy. So shy that in most public (and even in some home) restrooms, the sound of streaming water will play to mask the sound of one’s peeing. You might start to think you understand why performing a normal human function behind closed doors would make them feel uncomfortable until you learn that hot springs and public bathhouses in which patrons are expected to strip fully naked are insanely popular here.

Lastly, while the archetype of anything Japanese is highly efficient and process-oriented, for some irrational reason, there is no canonical side of the street to walk on.

Now, I recognize I might come across pretty critical and I want to diverge from that. There are plenty of resources and other blog posts out there that can go on and on about the great things about Japan, and I just wanted to share deep observations I have made from being immersed here for the last 2 months. In fairness, there are tons of great perks from having a society where 99% of members are courteous, kind, and trustworthy. This is literally a fantasy world. When I was still living in San Francisco and I had a car, I often dreamt of a place where 'courtesy re-park' could be a thing– a concept in which anyone could re-park anyone else's car if they just needed an inch or two more for parallel parking. I firmly believe Japan is the society in which that would work. 

Justin and I went to our first concert in Japan a few weeks ago to see a female hip hop duo, an electronic music producer and a ska band perform live. The venue was filled with young people dancing and drinking. There were noticeable differences between the way people act at concerts here. For one, while I'm here to report that even in Japan, people will push their way to the front, the difference is that here, they genuinely look displeased and are bowing their heads apologetically to everyone they happen to pass by. I also noticed that there is way less obnoxiously loud singing and woo-ing or screaming to take advantage of the lull moments, just to be noticed. But to me, the biggest difference was the behaviour when all the performers came out to take a group photo with the audience. Now, I've been in plenty of these, or rather I have tried to be but because I am short and no longer desire to be at the front of any show, I'm just hidden among a sea of arms in the air. To illustrate my point, here are some random concert selfies I found on the internet:

Gloria Gaynor ([link](https://twitter.com/gloriagaynor/status/633706245032144896 "link"))

Dave Matthews

Some random group from Morocco ([link](https://moroccosmodernlife.wordpress.com/ "link"))

Ed Sheeran ([link](https://www.instagram.com/p/BhUHXKCl7fW/?utm_source=ig_embed "https://www.instagram.com/p/BhUHXKCl7fW/?utm_source=ig_embed"))

Now here's the photo from the concert we went to:

([link](https://twitter.com/aboutmusicjp/status/1107642086306648065/photo/1))

I'm actually in it! Thank you Japanese people and your aversion to being in the way of others.

Every bit of this experience is enjoyable to us, even the frustrating parts. Personally, these culture shocks are my favourite parts of any travel I do. It forces us to question why we do things a certain way and challenges what we perceive as normal. In the end, it helps us understand ourselves and the world better. Not a day passes by that I’m not grateful I can live my life in a completely different way but with the same human beings.

* we were just curious (start up cafe)
* picture at concerts with hands in the air

1 - In the Japanese dub for Rick and Morty the Meeseeks are voiced by a woman.